# LigmarchOS

A personal and opinionated reference implementation of an immutable, image-based
operating system as described in [Fitting Everything Together]. Based on Arch
Linux and built using [mkosi].

## Features

- Immutable, verity-protected, signed OS images with hermetic /usr/
- Immutable, verity-protected, signed system extension images for use with
  systemd-sysext
- A/B styled system updates
- Encrypted root partition bound to a Trusted Platform Module (TPM2) chip
- Systemd-homed managed users with migratable encrypted home directories
- GPT automounting with systemd-boot (minimal to no configuration for
  fstab/crypttab)
- Unified Kernel Images (UKIs) signed for UEFI Secure Boot
- Secure Boot variable generation and auto enrollment
- Yubikey integration for signing secure boot variables, PCR signatures, and
  verity hash data with PKCS#11 tokens generated on hardware security device
- Password-less/2FA user authentication using FIDO2 tokens
- Heavily focussed toward the [Wayland] display server protocol

## Signing keys

Images are configured to be signed using a Yubikey with PIV (Smart card)
support. Assuming you have one setup for the PIV application, the script
`securebikey` will generate key pairs on the last five slots meant for retired
key management so that the primary certificate slots may be reserved for
personal use. The mkosi configuration is set to use these keys for signing via
its PKCS#11 URI in the validation section.

```sh
[Validation]
SecureBootKeySource=engine:pkcs11
SignExpectedPcrKeySource=engine:pkcs11
VerityKeySource=engine:pkcs11
SecureBootKey=pkcs11:object=Private key for Retired Key 18;type=private
VerityKey=pkcs11:object=Private key for Retired Key 17;type=private
SignExpectedPcrKey=pkcs11:object=Private key for Retired Key 16;type=private
```

If you wish to change the configured slots, `mkosi.conf` would need to be
modified as well as the associative array declaration in bash script. It is
highly recommended to read the appropriate documentation if modifications are
desired.

```sh
declare -A yubikey_piv_slots=(
        ["PK"]=95
        ["KEK"]=94
        ["db"]=93
        ["verity"]=92
        ["pcr"]=91
)
```

Note the script requires packages: yubikey-manager yubico-piv-tool efitools
openssl

## Building and updating

Running `mkosi -f` from the repository to remove previous build artifacts when
building the image, specifying -f twice removes previously cached images if
incremental builds are enabled running `mkosi sysupdate update` will call
`systemd-sysupdate` with the transfer source pointing to the outputs of the
previous build.

If there is an error with detecting the main image, you can manually call

```sh
/usr/lib/systemd/systemd-sysupdate \
    --transfer-source=build/mkosi.output \
    --definitions=mkosi.sysupdate update
```

## Installation

Ensure Secure Boot is in setup mode (disabled) in the firmware settings and
clear your Secure Boot keys. It's probably a good idea to back them up
beforehand just in case, as the keys generated by the `securebikey` script are
meant to prevent any EFI Binaries (including operating systems) from being
executed without your explicit signing.

The image can be installed onto portable devices by running
`mkosi burn /dev/<usb>` after building the image. This will create a bootable
USB drive with which you can use as a live image to populate other machines in a
self replicating manner. This is done by booting into the USB drive via the
firmware and selecting the "Installer" UKI profile. Upon entering the root
shell, run

```sh
systemd-repart --dry-run=no \
               --empty=force \
               --defer-partitions-empty=yes \
               --defer-partitions-factory-reset=yes \
               /dev/<drive>
```

before rebooting into the newly populated drive and selecting the regular
profile.

## User setup

After going through the firstboot setup you may run the following as your
systemd-homed user

```sh
homectl update \
    --fido2-device=auto \
    --fido2-with-client-pin=yes \
    --fido2-with-user-presence=yes \
    --auto-resize-mode=off \
    --luks-discard=on \
```

This will set up the user to use a FIDO2 device for authentication, you may
optionally choose whether to enable/disable one of the FIDO2 options according
to your threat model. Disabling auto resize mode avoids unnecessary wait times
during boot and shutdown especially if you aren't on a multi-user system. The
same idea applies when configuring allocated disk size for your user. Enabling
luks-discard ensures that empty space in the home directory is returned to the
backing file system below the LUKS2 volume, resulting in a "sparse" loopback
file. The extra LUKS mount options are BTRFS mount options to optimize image
builds by compressing data on disk and allowing users to delete subvolumes.

[Wayland]: https://wayland.freedesktop.org/
[mkosi]: https://github.com/systemd/mkosi
[Fitting Everything Together]:
  https://0pointer.net/blog/fitting-everything-together.html
